sesame-examples/docs/coverage.rst, before:

================
Examples covered
================

The best place to start exploring the functionality covered in this project is in the example app tests.

RemoteBondTest
==============

This integration test validates Present Value against a remote server. The view definition and bond inputs are defined in **RemoteViewBondUtils**.

RemoteFraTest
==============

This integration test validates Present Value against a remote server. The view definition and FRA inputs are defined in **RemoteViewFraUtils**

RemoteSwapTest
==============

This integration test validates Present Value, Bucketed PV01 and cash flows against a remote server. The view definition and swap inputs are defined in **RemoteViewSwapUtils**

Examples include swaps with fixed, float, spread, fixing, compounding, stubs, fees, single leg, zero coupon, cross currency and notional exchange.

RemoteCreditTest
================

This integration test validates Present Value and CS01 against a remote server. The view definition and credit inputs are defined in **RemoteViewCreditUtils**

Examples include legacy and standard credit default swaps.


RemoteComponentSwapTest
=======================

This integration test runs a single cycle of the engine locally, pulling the configuration components from the remote server.

RemoteViewConfigTest
====================

This integration test creates, persists and accesses a view config

Commit message:

REQS-844 OG solutions credit examples as library, restructure remote utils and example data

sesame-examples/docs/coverage.rst, after:

================
Examples covered
================

The best place to start exploring the functionality covered in this project is in the example app tests.

RemoteBondTest
==============

This integration test validates Present Value against a remote server. The view definition and bond inputs are defined in **BondViewUtils**.

RemoteFraTest
==============

This integration test validates Present Value against a remote server. The view definition and FRA inputs are defined in **FraViewUtils**

RemoteSwapTest
==============

This integration test validates Present Value, Bucketed PV01 and cash flows against a remote server. The view definition and swap inputs are defined in **SwapViewUtils**

Examples include swaps with fixed, float, spread, fixing, compounding, stubs, fees, single leg, zero coupon, cross currency and notional exchange.

RemoteCreditTest and LibraryCreditTest
======================================

These integration tests validates Present Value and CS01 against a remote server and as a library. The view definition and credit inputs are defined in **CreditViewUtils**

Examples include legacy and standard credit default swaps.

RemoteComponentSwapTest
=======================

This integration test runs a single cycle of the engine locally, pulling the configuration components from the remote server.

RemoteViewConfigTest
====================

This integration test creates, persists and accesses a view config
